Mettannotator Master project blog (#3053)
galaxyproject/galaxy-hub: content/news/2025-04-03-mettannotator-v1/index.md

<iframe title="Galaxy Workflow Embed_Prokka" style="width: 100%; height: 700px; border: none;" src="https://usegalaxy.eu/published/workflow?id=a448400f69594135&embed=true&buttons=true&about=false&heading=false&minimap=true&zoom_controls=true&initialX=-20&initialY=-20&zoom=1"></iframe>

These workflows make it easier for users to customize and visualize their analysis results, enhancing the overall utility of the pipeline.

## Missing Tools
Following are the tools that are missing from the current version of the pipeline but will be integrated in future updates. 
1. UniFIRE
2. run_dbCAN
3. CRISPRCasFinder
4. VIRify
5. pyCirclize
6. DefenceFinder
7. Pseudofinder

Out of these, VIRify and pyCircilize are not part of the direct pipeline but take the output from the pipeline to visualize the results. 
This makes sure that the pipeline has room for further development down the road. These continues updates will allow the new tools to be well integrated into the pipeline and streamline the annotation process further. 

## Testing the pipeline
During the process, the ported pipeline was tested, yielding promising results.

> <img src="./AMRFinderPlus.png" style="max-width: 800px;" alt="mettannotator_v1.0" />

Reviewer: can you change all the alt texts to correct alt texts ?

Reviewer: and give one line figure caption each

<img src="./InterProScan.png" style="max-width: 800px;" alt="mettannotator_v1.0" />
<img src="./Gecco_summary.png" style="max-width: 800px;" alt="mettannotator_v1.0" />
<img src="./eggNOGMapper.png" style="max-width: 800px;" alt="mettannotator_v1.0" />

The figures above showcases various output from individual tools within the pipeline such as  InterProScan, eggNOG Mapper ( annotation ), GECCO (detected BGCs ) on Genecluster_Samples. 
The workflow is highly streamlined on Galaxy and the results are readily demonstrated and understood.

> Developing/Porting the mettannotator pipeline in Galaxy has emphasized the importance of reproducible and modular workflows in modern bioinformatics. With Galaxy's intuitive interface and customization capabilities we were able to create a pipeline that balances flexibility and usability.  

Reviewer: that sounds like pure chatGPT please remove

## What's Next?

> The porting of mettannotator pipeline is the beginning of a long process of overhauling the entire genome annotation function to Galaxy. This version is not only sophisticated but provides a similar and clearer apporach to understanding the process, while utilizing an ample amount of relevant databases. The next step is to incorporate the remaining tools to give a complete and holistic view of genome annotation. 

Reviewer: This is not really correct, the advance is, that we have a complex combination of tools that give comprehensive output - but this will not overhaul the genome annotation function ! Please modify

---
title: 'MGnify Mettannotator Pipeline v1.0 on Galaxy'
date: '2025-04-03'
tease: "Improving Galaxy-based prokaryotic genome annotation by porting and extending the MGnify mettannotator pipeline"
hide_tease: false
authors: Gaurav Sharma
subsites: [eu,all,global]
---

## MGnify Mettannotator Pipeline v1.0

> In this current technologically advance age , the discovery of novel species is at its peak time. This has lead to a surge in prokaryotic genome assemblies both from isolated organisms and environmental samples. The necessity to annotate and represent novel taxa led to the creation of *mettannotator*, a scalable Nextflow pipeline.   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this current technologically advance age, the discovery of novel species is at its peak time. This has lead to a surge in prokaryotic genome assemblies both from isolated organisms and environmental samples. The necessity to annotate and represent novel taxa led to the creation of *mettannotator*, a scalable Nextflow pipeline by EBI.   
```

Reviewer: link to pipeline here

> Although it is an excellent alternative to numerous genome annotation tools available, it still hasn't reached the core crux of its usability. This is where the importance of porting this pipeline to Galaxy comes from. Galaxy not only provides an extensive library of features, is easily accessible but also its web-based platform makes it transparent for researchers, regardless of their programming background to access it.   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although it is an excellent addition to other genome annotation tools available, it requires usage experience in nextflow fr its execution. This is where the advantage of porting this pipeline to Galaxy comes from. Galaxy is easily accessible regardless of their programming background to access it.   
```

Reviewer: would be nice to add some more points like, can extend other Galaxy workflows, link some from GTN:
https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/search2?query=assembly
Can be simply modified. Can use public Galaxy resources ...

[<img style="max-width: 400px;" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/EBI-Metagenomics/mettannotator/main/media/mettannotator-schema.png" />](https://github.com/EBI-Metagenomics/mettannotator?tab=readme-ov-file)

> 

Reviewer: remove extra empty lines

3. AMRFinderPlus  
It is designed to find out antimicrobial resistance genes and point mutatations in protein/nucleotide sequences.

4. InterProScan  
Is used to provide functional analysis of protein sequences. It classifies the information into families and predict the presence of domains.

5. eggNOG Mapper  
It is used for the functional annotation of novel genome sequences.

6. GECCO  
Gene Cluster prediction with Conditional Random Fields is a scalable tool that helps in identifying putative novel Biosynthetic Gene Clusters.

7. Sanntis  
It is a tool used for identifying Biosynthetic gene clusters.

8. AntiSmash  
It is utilized for annotation and analysis of Biosynthetic gene clusters in bacterial and fungal genomes.

9. tRNA prediction  
It is a tool used for detection of transfer RNA. 

The working schema:   
1. The pipeline takes as an input a file that can include one or many genomes that needs to be analyzed. The user has the option of going the Bakta route (bacterial genome annotation) or Prokka route(archaeal genomes). 
2. The output from Prokka or Bakta is then supplemented by InterProScan and eggNOG-mapper.

> 3. The next step after the individual protein assignment is to delineates biosynthetic gene clusters and noncoding RNA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. The next step after the individual protein assignment is to detect biosynthetic gene clusters and noncoding RNA.
```

> 4. The pipeline individually outputs key files from each and every tool in an organized manner. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. The pipeline individually outputs key files from each tool in an organized manner. 
```

## Availability on Galaxy

Version 1.0 of the MGnify mettannotator pipeline (Bakta) is now fully available on the Galaxy EU server, bringing advanced metagenomic analysis workflow to researchers/scientists through an accessible, web-based interface.
The following consists of both the workflows, one with Bakta and another with Prokka. 

<iframe title="Galaxy Workflow Embed_Bakta" style="width: 100%; height: 700px; border: none;" src="https://usegalaxy.eu/published/workflow?id=cc59ae1a9878942c&embed=true&buttons=true&about=false&heading=false&minimap=true&zoom_controls=true&initialX=-20&initialY=-20&zoom=1"></iframe>

<iframe title="Galaxy Workflow Embed_Prokka" style="width: 100%; height: 700px; border: none;" src="https://usegalaxy.eu/published/workflow?id=a448400f69594135&embed=true&buttons=true&about=false&heading=false&minimap=true&zoom_controls=true&initialX=-20&initialY=-20&zoom=1"></iframe>

These workflows make it easier for users to customize and visualize their analysis results, enhancing the overall utility of the pipeline.

## Missing Tools

> Following are the tools that are missing from the current version of the pipeline due to complexity and version issues. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Following are the tools that are missing from the current version of the pipeline but will be integrated in future updates. 
```

1. UniFIRE
2. run_dbCAN
3. CRISPRCasFinder
4. VIRify
5. pyCirclize
6. DefenceFinder
7. Pseudofinder

> Out of these, VIRify and pyCircilize are not part of the direct pipeline but takes the output from the pipeline to visualize the results. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Out of these, VIRify and pyCircilize are not part of the direct pipeline but take the output from the pipeline to visualize the results. 
```

This makes sure that the pipeline has room for further development down the road. These continues updates will allow the new tools to be well integrated into the pipeline and streamline the annotation process further. 

## Testing the pipeline
During the process, the ported pipeline was tested, yielding promising results.

<img src="./AMRFinderPlus.png" style="max-width: 800px;" alt="mettannotator_v1.0" />
<img src="./InterProScan.png" style="max-width: 800px;" alt="mettannotator_v1.0" />
<img src="./Gecco_summary.png" style="max-width: 800px;" alt="mettannotator_v1.0" />
<img src="./mettannotator_results_f.png" style="max-width: 800px;" alt="mettannotator_v1.0" />
<img src="./eggNOGMapper.png" style="max-width: 800px;" alt="mettannotator_v1.0" />

> <img src="./mettannotator_results_f_.png" style="max-width: 800px;" alt="mettannotator_v1.0" />

Reviewer: this is not part of the output right ?

The figures above showcases various output from individual tools within the pipeline such as  InterProScan, eggNOG Mapper ( annotation ), GECCO (detected BGCs ) on Genecluster_Samples. 
The workflow is highly streamlined on Galaxy and the results are readily demonstrated and understood.

> ## Conclusion

Reviewer: would remove conclusion

Developing/Porting the mettannotator pipeline in Galaxy has emphasized the importance of reproducible and modular workflows in modern bioinformatics. With Galaxy's intuitive interface and customization capabilities we were able to create a pipeline that balances flexibility and usability.  

## What's Next?

> The porting of mettannotator pipeline is the beginning of a long process of overhauling the entire genome annotation function to Galaxy that will alleviate its usage extensively. This version is not only sophisticated but provides a similar and clearer apporach to understanding the process, while utilizing an ample amount of relevant databases. The next step is to incorporate the remaining tools to give a complete and holistic view of genome annotation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The porting of mettannotator pipeline is the beginning of a long process of overhauling the entire genome annotation function to Galaxy. This version is not only sophisticated but provides a similar and clearer apporach to understanding the process, while utilizing an ample amount of relevant databases. The next step is to incorporate the remaining tools to give a complete and holistic view of genome annotation. 
```
